[docs] Improved inpaint docs (#5210)
huggingface/diffusers: docs/source/en/using-diffusers/inpaint.md

specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

# Inpainting

[[open-in-colab]]

Inpainting replaces or edits specific areas of an image. This makes it a useful tool for image restoration like removing defects and artifacts, or even replacing an image area with something entirely new. Inpainting relies on a mask to determine which regions of an image to fill in; the area to inpaint is represented by white pixels and the area to keep is represented by black pixels. The white pixels are filled in by the prompt.

> With 🤗 Diffusers, here is how you can quickly start inpainting:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With 🤗 Diffusers, here is how you can do inpainting:
```

mask_image = load_image("https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/inpaint_mask.png").convert("RGB")
```

3. Create a prompt to inpaint the image with and pass it to the pipeline with the base and mask images:

```py
prompt = "a black cat with glowing eyes, cute, adorable, disney, pixar, highly detailed, 8k"
negative_prompt = "bad anatomy, deformed, ugly, disfigured"
image = pipeline(prompt=prompt, negative_prompt=negative_prompt, image=init_image, mask_image=mask_image).images[0]
```

<div class="flex gap-4">
  <div>
    <img class="rounded-xl" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/inpaint.png"/>
    <figcaption class="mt-2 text-center text-sm text-gray-500">base image</figcaption>
  </div>
  <div>
    <img class="rounded-xl" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/inpaint-cat.png"/>
    <figcaption class="mt-2 text-center text-sm text-gray-500">generated image</figcaption>
  </div>
</div>

## Popular models

> [Stable Diffusion v1.5](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5), [Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL)](https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0), and [Kandinsky 2.2](https://huggingface.co/kandinsky-community/kandinsky-2-2-decoder-inpaint) are among the most popular models for inpainting. SDXL typically produces higher resolution images than Stable Diffusion v1.5, and Kandinsky 2.2 is also capable of generating high-quality images thanks to an image prior model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Stable Diffusion Inpainting](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-inpainting), [Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL) Inpainting](diffusers/stable-diffusion-xl-1.0-inpainting-0.1), and [Kandinsky 2.2](https://huggingface.co/kandinsky-community/kandinsky-2-2-decoder-inpaint) are among the most popular models for inpainting. SDXL typically produces higher resolution images than Stable Diffusion v1.5, and Kandinsky 2.2 is also capable of generating high-quality images thanks to an image prior model.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think "... thanks to an image prior model" is adding any additional info here. I think we can discard that bit. No strong opinions.

> ### Stable Diffusion v1.5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Stable Diffusion Inpainting
```

> Stable Diffusion v1.5 is a latent diffusion model finetuned on 512x512 images. It is a good starting point for inpainting because it is relatively fast and generates good quality images. To use this model for inpainting, you'll need to pass a prompt, base and mask image to the pipeline:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stable Diffusion Inpainting is a latent diffusion model finetuned on 512x512 images on inpainting. It is a good starting point for inpainting because it is relatively fast and generates good quality images. To use this model for inpainting, you'll need to pass a prompt, base and mask image to the pipeline:
```

```py
import torch
from diffusers import AutoPipelineForInpainting
from diffusers.utils import load_image

pipeline = AutoPipelineForInpainting.from_pretrained(
    "runwayml/stable-diffusion-inpainting", torch_dtype=torch.float16, variant="fp16"
).to("cuda")
pipeline.enable_model_cpu_offload()
pipeline.enable_xformers_memory_efficient_attention()

# load base and mask image
init_image = load_image("https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/inpaint.png").convert("RGB")
mask_image = load_image("https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/inpaint_mask.png").convert("RGB")

generator = torch.Generator("cuda").manual_seed(92)
prompt = "concept art digital painting of an elven castle, inspired by lord of the rings, highly detailed, 8k"
image = pipeline(prompt=prompt, image=init_image, mask_image=mask_image, generator=generator).images[0]
```

> ### Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL)

Reviewer 2: Should this be SDXL Inpainting following what we're doing in the rest of the guide? 

* SDXL stands for Stable Diffusion XL and that's already mentioned above.
* We're using "Stable Diffusion Inpainting". So, I guess it makes sense to use "SDXL Inpainting" as well?

SDXL is a larger and more powerful version of Stable Diffusion v1.5. This model can follow a two-stage model process (though each model can also be used alone); the base model generates an image, and a refiner model takes that image and further enhances its details and quality. Take a look at the [SDXL](sdxl) guide for a more comprehensive guide on how to use SDXL and configure it's parameters.

```py
import torch
from diffusers import AutoPipelineForInpainting
from diffusers.utils import load_image

pipeline = AutoPipelineForInpainting.from_pretrained(

>     "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0", torch_dtype=torch.float16, variant="fp16"

Reviewer: We should use this checkpoint here: diffusers/stable-diffusion-xl-1.0-inpainting-0.1

Author: No wonder my results looked off! 😭 I'll update

).to("cuda")
pipeline.enable_model_cpu_offload()
pipeline.enable_xformers_memory_efficient_attention()

# load base and mask image
init_image = load_image("https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/inpaint.png").convert("RGB")
mask_image = load_image("https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/inpaint_mask.png").convert("RGB")

generator = torch.Generator("cuda").manual_seed(92)
prompt = "concept art digital painting of an elven castle, inspired by lord of the rings, highly detailed, 8k"
image = pipeline(prompt=prompt, image=init_image, mask_image=mask_image, generator=generator).images[0]
```

> ### Kandinsky 2.2

Reviewer 2: Kandinsky 2.2 Inpainting?

unmasked_unchanged_image.save("force_unmasked_unchanged.png")
```

> ## Chained inpainting pipelines

Reviewer 2: Love this!

> ## Chained inpainting pipelines

Reviewer 3: question for @patrickvonplaten

I remember I did this PR https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/pull/4819 to supports chaining inpainting with other pipelines but it's not obvious how though -  we need to create `masked_image_latents` from `image` and `mask` with an additional step no?

Reviewer: If you change the mask then yes, but if you keep the same mask then I don't think it's necessary. 

One might want to always keep the same mask, but inpaint multiple times

> [`AutoPipelineForInpainting`] can be chained with other 🤗 Diffusers pipelines to edit their outputs.

Reviewer 2: Should we also add a line or two about how chained pipelines are beneficial?

```

And let's inpaint the masked area with a waterfall:

```py
pipeline = AutoPipelineForInpainting.from_pretrained(
    "kandinsky-community/kandinsky-2-2-decoder-inpaint", torch_dtype=torch.float16, variant="fp16"
).to("cuda")
pipeline.enable_model_cpu_offload()
pipeline.enable_xformers_memory_efficient_attention()

prompt = "digital painting of a fantasy waterfall, cloudy"
image = pipeline(prompt=prompt, image=image, mask_image=mask_image).images[0]
image
```

<div class="flex flex-row gap-4">
  <div class="flex-1">
    <img class="rounded-xl" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/inpaint-text-chain.png"/>
    <figcaption class="mt-2 text-center text-sm text-gray-500">text-to-image</figcaption>
  </div>
  <div class="flex-1">
    <img class="rounded-xl" src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/inpaint-text-chain-out.png"/>
    <figcaption class="mt-2 text-center text-sm text-gray-500">inpaint</figcaption>
  </div>
</div>

> ### Image-to-image-to-inpaint

Reviewer: It's mostly the other way that is interesting here:
- a) First do inpainting
- b) Then do img2img or upscaling, e.g. to improve quality

  </div>
</div>

## Optimize

It can be difficult and slow to run diffusion models if you're resource constrained, but it dosen't have to be with a few optimization tricks. One of the biggest (and easiest) optimizations you can enable is switching to memory-efficient attention. If you're using PyTorch 2.0, [scaled-dot product attention](../optimization/torch2.0#scaled-dot-product-attention) is automatically enabled and you don't need to do anything else. For non-PyTorch 2.0 users, you can install and use [xFormers](../optimization/xformers)'s implementation of memory-efficient attention. Both options reduce memory usage and accelerate inference.

You can also offload the model to the GPU to save even more memory:

```diff
+ pipeline.enable_xformers_memory_efficient_attention()
+ pipeline.enable_model_cpu_offload()
```

To speed-up your inference code even more, use [`torch_compile`](../optimization/torch2.0#torch.compile). You should wrap `torch.compile` around the most intensive component in the pipeline which is typically the UNet:

```py
pipe.unet = torch.compile(pipe.unet, mode="reduce-overhead", fullgraph=True)
```

> Learn more in the [Reduce memory usage](../optimization/memory) and [Torch 2.0](../optimization/torch2.0) guides.

Reviewer 2: Yeah after this section, I definitely think we should think a bit more about how we can organize and distribute these components that are heavily reused across different docs. 

(Doesn't have to be addressed in this PR).
